Microgravity Induces Pelvic Bone Loss through Osteoclastic Activity, Osteocytic Osteolysis, and Osteoblastic Cell Cycle Inhibition by CDKN1a/p21


Abstract
Bone is a dynamically remodeled tissue that requires gravity-mediated mechanical stimulation for maintenance of mineral content and structure. Homeostasis in bone occurs through a balance in the activities and signaling of osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and osteocytes, as well as proliferation and differentiation of their stem cell progenitors. Microgravity and unloading are known to cause osteoclast-mediated bone resorption; however, we hypothesize that osteocytic osteolysis, and cell cycle arrest during osteogenesis may also contribute to bone loss in space. To test this possibility, we exposed 16-week-old female C57BL/6J mice (n = 8) to microgravity for 15-days on the STS-131 space shuttle mission. Analysis of the pelvis by µCT shows decreases in bone volume fraction (BV/TV) of 6.29%, and bone thickness of 11.91%. TRAP-positive osteoclast-covered trabecular bone surfaces also increased in microgravity by 170% (p = 0.004), indicating osteoclastic bone degeneration. High-resolution X-ray nanoCT studies revealed signs of lacunar osteolysis, including increases in cross-sectional area (+17%, p = 0.022), perimeter (+14%, p = 0.008), and canalicular diameter (+6%, p = 0.037). Expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 1, 3, and 10 in bone, as measured by RT-qPCR, was also up-regulated in microgravity (+12.94, +2.98 and +16.85 fold respectively, p<0.01), with MMP10 localized to osteocytes, and consistent with induction of osteocytic osteolysis. Furthermore, expression of CDKN1a/p21 in bone increased 3.31 fold (p<0.01), and was localized to osteoblasts, possibly inhibiting the cell cycle during tissue regeneration as well as conferring apoptosis resistance to these cells. Finally the apoptosis inducer Trp53 was down-regulated by −1.54 fold (p<0.01), possibly associated with the quiescent survival-promoting function of CDKN1a/p21. In conclusion, our findings identify the pelvic and femoral region of the mouse skeleton as an active site of rapid bone loss in microgravity, and indicate that this loss is not limited to osteoclastic degradation. Therefore, this study offers new evidence for microgravity-induced osteocytic osteolysis, and CDKN1a/p21-mediated osteogenic cell cycle arrest.


Results
Body Mass of Animals Pre- and Post-Flight
All flight and ground control mice were observed to be in good condition by veterinary examination immediately post-landing. Noticeably, the posture of space-flown mouse tails after landing was vertical, indicating increased vestibular function in this group. The average weight loss of space-flown mice was 2.0 g (−9.1%, SD = 2.1 g, p = 0.013) significantly lower than pre-flight values, consistent with tissue atrophy in microgravity, while synchronous ground control mice only lost an average of 0.7 g (−3.4%, SD = 0.9 g, p = 0.096) of their body weight relative to the beginning of spaceflight. The difference in body weight loss averages for flight versus ground controls was not statistically significant (p = 0.143). Flight habitats showed utilization of resources on average of 10% less food, and 24% less water than synchronous ground controls. However, food and water utilization does not account for actual consumption by mice, because differences may occur in food bar and water losses due to crumbling and spillage in microgravity versus 1 g.

Spaceflight Causes Osteoclast and Osteocyte-Mediated Bone Loss in the Pelvic Region of Mice
To determine if bone loss occurred in microgravity, we examined the bone structure and mineral density of the ischial region of the pelvis using micro-computed tomography (µCT). Specifically, we investigated the region from the caudal apex of the obturator foramen through to the ischial tuberosity (Fig. 1A) and found that spaceflight resulted in a 6.23% decrease (p = 0.005) in bone volume fraction (BV/TV) and 11.91% decrease (p = 0.002) in overall bone thickness (Th) (Table 1). No difference was observed in bone mineral density and total bone volumes measured (TV and BV) (Table 1). However, comparison of ischial structural thickness of spaceflight versus ground control animals revealed that bone from flight animals not only had a reduced overall thickness (Fig. 1F and G), but also showed changes in ischial shape localized to the surface of the descending ramus of ischium along the posterior margin of the obturator foramen (Fig. 1B). Analysis of cross-sectional slices revealed that the flight samples had similar widths at two measured points (b/c ratio of 1.09, Fig. 1D, Table 2), and a mean bend angle of 167° (deviating 13° from linear, or less bent), compared to a width ratio of 1.39 in ground control samples and a bend angle of 160° (deviating 20° from linear, or more bent) (Fig. 1C, Table 2), indicating that ischial geometry changes in response to spaceflight. Furthermore, when we analyzed the thickness distribution of ischial cross-sectional slices, we found that flight animals exhibited a higher percentage of slices in the 0.007–0.128 mm range and a lower percentage of slices in the 0.129–0.291 mm range compared to ground controls (Fig. 1E). The shift in thickness distribution to the left in flight animals indicates an overall decrease in cross-sectional thickness throughout the ischium.

In order to study nanoscale aspects of bone loss following spaceflight, we used transmission x-ray microscopy to perform 40 nm resolution nano-computed tomography (nanoCT). No difference was found in bulk density of cortical bone between the flight and ground controls (Fig. 2G), however, flight samples exhibited an enlargement in lacunae of 17% in cross sectional area (p = 0.022) and a 14% increase in lacunae perimeter (p = 0.008) when compared to ground controls (Fig. 2C–D, E). In addition, lacunar circularity decreased in spaceflight by 9% (p = 0.037) indicating an increase in irregularly-shaped or elongated lacunae (Fig. 2A–B, F). We also measured canalicular diameters in a 15 µm perilacunar region and found an increase of 6% in spaceflight samples relative to ground controls (p = 0.037, Fig. 2F), indicating that the observed lacunar enlargement may extend throughout these networks.
To characterize osteoclast bone resorbing activity during spaceflight, we used TRAP staining on sections of the proximal femur. We found a 197% increase in osteoclast numbers in the bone surface of the trabecular region below the femoral head growth plate of flight samples (9.99 Oc/mm) compared to ground controls (3.36 Oc/mm) (p = 0.001, Fig. 3A–C). The bone surface covered by osteoclasts also increased by 154% in microgravity (25.4% in spaceflight versus 9.99% in ground controls, p = 0.004 Fig. 3D). Results for spaceflight induction of all TRAP-positive osteoclasts, independent of number of nuclei, were comparable. Interestingly, we also found an increase in the ratio of TRAP-positive osteocytes to total osteocytes in the femoral shaft of flight samples compared to ground controls (34.43% and 20.94% respectively, p = 0.004, Fig. 3D–G). To determine if osteocyte survival was altered by microgravity we measured the number of empty lacunae in cortical bone from the proximal femur and found no differences between ground and flight samples (10.6% and 10.0% empty lacunae respectively, p = 0.680, Fig. 3H). Pyknotic nuclei were occasionally present in tissue surrounding bone, but were non-detectable in osteocytes. These results indicate roles for both osteoclastic and osteocytic bone degradation in microgravity.
Spaceflight Induces MMP-Mediated Extracellular Matrix Remodeling in Bone
Among bone extracellular matrix related genes analyzed using RT-qPCR arrays we found small but statistically significant alterations in mRNA levels of collagens, and laminin subunits, but not in fibronectin (Fig. 4A, Table 3). Among matrix metalloproteinases, MMP 1, 3, and 10 showed significant up-regulation in flight samples compared to ground controls (12.94, 2.98, and 16.85 fold respectively, p<0.05), while MMP inhibitors, TIMP 1, 2, and 3, displayed no statistically significant change in gene expression levels (Table 3). Several cell adhesion molecules; specifically Cdh4, Cdh11, and Vcam1 were found to be up-regulated (2.46, 1.53, and 1.57 fold respectively, p<0.05), while Itgal and Icam1 were found to be down-regulated (1.45 and 1.52 fold respectively, p<0.05) (Fig. 4A, Table 3). These results indicate that spaceflight promotes bone extracellular matrix degradation, while overall increase in expression of collagen, Tuft1, Sparc, and Phex (Table 3), may be related to increased bone mineralization following degradation.

To determine the cellular location of MMP10 we conducted immunohistochemical analysis on paraffin embedded sections of the proximal femur. Results showed MMP10-positive staining in osteoblasts along the periosteal surface of the proximal femur in both flight and ground controls. However, osteocytes embedded in the bone matrix exhibited strong MMP10-positive staining in flight samples (Fig. 4C) but not in ground (Fig. 4B).

Spaceflight Suppresses Pro-Osteogenic Growth and Proliferation Gene Expression in Bone
To further study the effects of spaceflight in reducing bone formation, we investigated the expression of genes involved in promoting the cellular growth, proliferation, and differentiation of the osteoprogenitor lineage. A number of growth factors studied showed altered gene expression levels by qPCR, including Bmp-4, Tgf-β2, Gdf10, and Csf3 (−1.99, −1.59, −1.43, 3.72 fold, p<0.05) (Fig. 5A, Table 3). Furthermore, we found several genes associated with cell growth and differentiation that were altered, including Egr1, Myod1, and Fgf3 which were down-regulated (−2.30, −1.61, and −1.7 fold respectively, p<0.05), while Twist1 and Fgf1 were up-regulated (1.80 and 1.53 fold respectively, p<0.01) (Fig. 5A, Table 3). Results also indicate the alteration in gene expression of two transcription factors, Vitamin D receptor (Vdr) and Sox9, which exhibited a 2.80 fold up-regulation and 2.28 fold down-regulation respectively (Fig. 5A, Table 3).

Spaceflight Induces CDKN1a/p21 but Not Trp53/p53 Expression in Bone
In addition to the effects we observed on osteogenesis promoting gene expression, we hypothesized that bone loss in space may also be mediated by alterations in intracellular signaling cascades resulting in activation of the p53/p21 signaling pathways that promote cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Analysis of spaceflight samples by qPCR showed that mRNA expression levels of tumor suppressor gene p53 (Trp/p53) were down-regulated 1.54 fold while CDKN1a/p21 exhibited a 3.31 fold up-regulation in response to exposure to spaceflight (p<0.01) (Fig. 6G). The expression of Mdm2, a negative regulator of p53, was also increased, indicating suppression of the p53 apoptotic pathway (Fig. 6G, Table 3). Several genes associated with cell cycle regulation were also altered in flight samples including cell cycle arrest related genes Fbxo4, Fbxo31, Btg2, and Cdkn2b (1.87, 1.74, −1.50, and 1.41 fold respectively, p<0.05), and cell cycle related genes cyclin B2, Cdc25c, Mul1, Gdf10, and Csf3 (1.63, 1.55, 1.64, −1.43 and 3.72 fold respectively, p<0.05) (Fig. 6G, Table 3). Several genes related to the induction of apoptosis were also altered including, Cradd, Dapk1, Fbxo3, which were up-regulated in flight samples (1.62, 1.53, and 1.48 fold respectively, p<0.01) (Fig. 6G). Hecw2, which acts to stabilize p73, was also up-regulated in flight samples (2.25, p<0.01), as was p73, albeit not statistically significantly (2.02 fold, p = 0.20) (Table 3).

In order to determine the specific cellular localization of the p21 and p53 proteins, we conducted immunohistochemical analysis on sections of the right proximal femur of both flight animals and synchronous ground controls. Using a rabbit anti-mouse p21 polyclonal antibody, we found that osteoblasts along the periosteal surface of the proximal femur were p21-positive in flight samples but not in synchronous ground controls (n = 6, Fig. 6A–B). Muscle fibers surrounding the femur contained strongly positive p21 staining nuclei in spaceflight but not ground control samples (Fig. 6C–F). When we investigated the expression of p53 in proximal sections of the femur using a p53 polyclonal antibody, no significant staining was found in most sections from both flight and ground controls’, indicating that p53 was not strongly expressed.

Spaceflight Alters Gene Expression That Can Interfere with Survival and Mitogenic Signal Transduction
As cell signaling promoting cell survival via phosphoinositide 3-kinase (Pi3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) and cell proliferation via Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAP kinase) can both be activated in response to mechano-transduction, and as they can modulate p53 and p21 signaling, we investigated key genes of interest in these pathways with qPCR. MAP kinases, such as MAPK10, MAPK11, and MAPK12 (3.81, −1.54, and −1.43 fold respectively, p<0.01), MAP 3 kinases, such as Moloney sarcoma oncogene, Mos (−4.18 fold, p<0.01), and cell growth molecules including Egr1 (−2.30 fold, p<0.01) showed altered expression in spaceflight (Fig. 5, Table 3). Several molecules associated with Ras signaling displayed alterations, including Nf1 (−1.45 fold, p<0.05) and Sos1 (−2.51 fold, p<0.01); however, only small changes in KRas expression was found (−1.24 fold, p<0.05) (Fig. 5B, Table 3). No statistically significant alterations in Pi3K subunits were noted except a small change in the alpha polypeptide of the catalytic subunit of Pi3K (−1.39 fold, p<0.01) (Table 3). Additionally, no statistically significant alterations in Akt1 or 2 were found, however, a small change in Akt3/PKB was observed (−1.32 fold, p<0.01) (Fig. 5B, Table 3). After exposure to microgravity, the NF-κB inhibitor, IκBα, exhibited a significant increase in expression (2.03 fold, p<0.01) and NF-κB mRNA exhibited a slight decrease in expression (−1.27 fold, p<0.05) (Fig. 5B, Table 3). Several downstream effectors of these signaling pathways were also altered in response to spaceflight, including Rps6kb1, a down-stream effector of the Pi3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, and Eif4ebp1, a repressor of translation (−2.05 and 1.55 fold respectively, p<0.05). Eif4e, which is activated by Rps6kb1 and inactivated by Eif4bp1, was also down-regulated slightly by spaceflight (−1.40, p<0.05) (Fig. 5B, Table 3). Transcription factors and transcriptional targets associated with these pathways were also investigated and it was found that activated transcription factors c-Fos and Nfatc4 (−2.37 and −1.98 fold respectively, p<0.05) were altered in response to spaceflight. Analysis of NFκB transcriptional target genes involved in cell adhesion, regulation of apoptosis and growth factors and ligands including Traf1, BMP4, Egr1, p53, and MMP3 (repressor) were found to be down-regulated, indicating inhibition of this pathway after exposure to spaceflight (Fig. 5B, Table 3).


Methods
Ethics Statement
All experimental animal procedures for STS-131 were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Ames Research Center under protocol NAS-10-002-Y1, and conformed to the U.S. National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

Animals
Female, 16-week-old C57BL/6J mice (n = 8) were subjected to 15-days of spaceflight on board the space shuttle Discovery during the STS-131 mission, and as part of the NASA Biospecimen Sharing Program for the spaceflight experiment “Mouse Antigen-Specific CD4+ T Cell Priming and Memory Response during Spaceflight”. Animals used in this study were not subjected to experimental procedures during spaceflight. Animals were housed in the NASA Animal Enclosure Module (AEM) habitats for the duration of the flight and were exposed to normal day/night cycles. The NASA AEM units are composed of a stainless steel grid cage, fan blowers, a layered filter system, interior lamps, food bars and a water box. They are self-contained habitats that provide up to 8 mice with constant access to food and water while also providing a waste management system that isolates the animals from their waste and food crumbs. The AEMs were housed within a standard middeck locker on board the space shuttle. Animals were not acclimated to habitats prior to flight, but were provided with both the food bars and water bottles used in flight for at least 2 weeks prior to launch. Synchronous ground controls were also conducted using identical AEM modules. Spaceflight and synchronous ground control animals were weighed pre- and post-flight and were subjected to veterinary examination before euthanasia. Food and water consumption of each group was measured upon recovery and averaged per mouse per day. Animals were euthanized approximately 2 h after landing using isoflurane anesthesia followed by thoracotomy. Upon recovery, the pelvis and femur were dissected and the soft tissue was removed from the bones. The bone marrow was flushed from both left and right ilium and proximal femora and used for other experimental procedures not described in this paper. Care was taken to avoid disturbing the cancellous bone and bone marrow in both femoral heads during aspiration, to allow for TRAP and immunohistochemical analysis of this region. Both ilia were placed in 1 ml RNAlater at 4°C for 24 h to enable it to penetrate the bone. Vials were then transferred to −80°C and shipped on dry ice to NASA Ames Research Center for isolation of RNA and gene expression analysis. The pelvic ischium and proximal femur were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h at 4°C, washed twice with PBS, and stored in PBS at 4°C. The pelvic ischium was used for microcomputed tomography (µCT) and nano-computed tomography (nCT), while the proximal femur was used for TRAP staining and immunohistochemical analysis of proteins of interest as described below.

Micro-Computed Tomography (µCT)
Micro-computed tomography (µCT) was used to image and quantify bone morphometry of the ischium region in the right coxa (SkyScan 1174 microCT scanner, Kontich, Belgium). Of the original 8 samples in each group, both flight and ground control had one sample that was fractured during the dissection rendering it unsuitable for the µCT analysis (n = 7).

Scanning
Each ischium with soft tissue still intact, previously fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stored in PBS, was mounted vertically into a low-x-ray density Styrofoam holder, wrapped with Press-n-Seal film to prevent drying, and scanned in air. Images were acquired at 50 kV and 800 µA with 0.5 mm aluminum x-ray detector filter, a pixel resolution of 6.77 µm, voxel volume of 310.29 µm3, an exposure time of 3.5 s per frame with 3 averaging frames, a rotation step of 0.5°, and a rotational angle of 180°.

Reconstruction
Raw image data were reconstructed into a stack of 2D cross-sectional slices using NRecon volumetric reconstruction software (Skyscan v1.6.3.2). Reconstruction was carried out with a beam hardening correction of 30%, a ring artefact correction of 4, and a dynamic contrast range of 0 to 0.10.

Analysis of bone structure and mineral density
For analysis, a selected region of 4.89 mm (720 slices), starting from 5 slices proximal to caudal apex of the obturator foramen through ischial tuberosity (Fig. 1A), was analyzed using CTan software (Skyscan v1.10.9.0). A global binarization threshold of 65/255 was applied to the reconstructed images. As the mouse ischium is a thin bone with similarly sized bridge-like trabeculae connecting two opposing cortical sheets, we were unable to analyse cortical and trabecular bone regions separately. Instead we contoured along a perimeter of the cortical bone using a “shrink-wrap” custom plug-in of CTan software and analyzed them together. The following indices for mineralized tissue were investigated: total volume of region of interest (TV), bone volume of region of interest (BV), bone volume fraction (BV/TV), average thickness (Th), and mean linear attenuation coefficient. In addition to calculated indices, 3D analysis included the generation of color-coded image maps of ischial structure thickness. These images were loaded into CTvox 3D visualization program (Skyscan v1.0.or479) for a qualitative comparison of bone thickness between flight and ground control groups. To gain some insight on whether the shape of the ischium had changed with the flight environment, we examined a single cross-sectional slice, cut at the dorsal-most point of the descending ischial ramus, and measured the bend angle, the length, and the width at two points, half and one-third of the way from the proximal end (Fig. 1D), using CTan measurement tools. A two-tailed student’s t-test (GraphPad PRISM) was carried out to compare the means, with p-value <0.05 considered to be statistically significant.

Nano-Computed Tomography (NanoCT)
Following spaceflight, we performed high-resolution measurements of bone density and lacunar nanostructure using the hard X-ray Transmission Microscopy (TXM) facility at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Light Source (SSRL). Analysis was performed on similarly oriented transverse sections of cortical bone from mouse ischia near the dorsal-most point of the descending ischial ramus.

Sample preparation
Ischia from seven ground control and eight spaceflight mice were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stored in PBS, prior to cutting 30 µm thick cortical bone sections using single-use steel histology blades.

Scanning
X-ray attenuation images were acquired at 5.4 keV energy with 40 nm resolution. Triplicate 0° angle images of each sample for osteocyte lacunar and canalicular analysis were obtained with an exposure of 4 s and a beam intensity of 2. Images at 90°, were exposed for 8 s with a beam intensity of 1, and used to measure section thickness.

Measurement of bone mineral density
For calibration of mineral density to an X-ray attenuation curve, we used chlorapatite crystals standards and methods previously described [22]. Briefly, to account for beam intensity variations, for each synchrotron experimental run we imaged known size and mineral density chlorapatite crystal standards and plotted log x-ray attenuation relative to thicknesses in the 1 to 100 m size calibration range. Bone density was then calculated from measured 0° bone attenuation values and 90° section thickness values, relative to the standard x-ray attenuation curve.

Lacunar morphometry
For quantification of lacunar area, circularity, and perimeter, we used Image J software to trace lacunae in 0° angle images and measured area, circularity, and perimeter in the outlined regions of interest. To measure changes in the dimensions of canaliculi following spaceflight, we selected a 15 µm region of interest extending into the bone from the lacunar wall surface, and measured canalicular diameters. Unpaired t-test analysis was carried out to compare the means, with p-value <0.05 considered to be statistically significant.

Tartrate Resistant Acid Phosphatase (TRAP) Staining
The right proximal femur was used for tartrate resistance acid phosphatase staining. Bone marrow was gently aspirated from the shaft region of the femur so as not to disturb cancellous bone and bone marrow in the femoral head. Flushed bone was then demineralized using 20% EDTA for 21 days, with solution changes every three days. Decalcified bones were dehydrated in a graded ethanol series and embedded in paraffin in preparation for immunohistochemical analysis. Longitudinal sections of 7 μm thickness were prepared and immediately before analysis, sections were deparaffinized in 100% xylene, and rehydrated in 100% EtOH, 95% EtOH, 75% EtOH and DI H2O consecutively. TRAP staining was then conducted on these sections (n = 6 sections per animal, n = 5 mice). The sections were stained for tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) using an Acid Phosphatase Leukocyte Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, Catalog #387A-1KT) according to the manufacturer protocol. Images were acquired immediately after staining at magnifications of 20× and 40× using a SPOT RT slider cooled CCD camera attached to an Olympus BX51 microscope. All images were taken at the same balance, gain, and brightness. To quantify osteoclast numbers and osteoclast contact with bone surfaces we imaged the central cancellous bone region in the proximal femur just below the growth plate. Criteria for inclusion of osteoclasts in cell counts included TRAP-positive staining, at least 4 nuclei, and a contact surface with cancellous bone of at least 10 µm. Using Image J, we measured the total number of osteoclasts that met the inclusion criteria, length of cancellous bone surface, and length osteoclast contact surface with cancellous bone. The following indices for mineralized tissue were investigated: total number of osteoclasts per mm of bone surface (N.Oc./BS), and percentage of osteoclast-covered surface (Oc.S./BS). To analyze osteocytes, Image J was used to perform a cell count of TRAP-positive osteocytes and total number of osteocytes in the cortical bone immediately distal to the growth plate of the femur. All statistical analyses were performed using an unpaired t-test to determine the significant differences between ground control and spaceflight samples.

RNA Isolation and RT-qPCR Analysis
Total RNA was isolated from both RNAlater-fixed pelvic ilia (flushed of bone marrow) from spaceflight and ground control animals using the TRIzol method (Invitrogen). Briefly, ilia were homogenized with a hand held homogenizer in 1 ml of TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Catalog #15596-026) for 30–60 s. Homogenized samples were incubated in TRIzol for an additional 5 min, 200 μl of chloroform was added and samples were incubated for a further 3 min. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The aqueous phase containing RNA was placed into a new tube and RNA was precipitated with 600 μl of isopropanol for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged again at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was discarded. RNA was washed with 1 ml 75% EtOH, centrifuged at 7,500 g for 5 min at 4°C, the pellet was air dried and re-dissolved in 30 μl RNase-free water. Samples were then purified using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Catalog #74104) with genomic DNA elimination step according to the manufacturers protocol. RNA concentration was measured using spectrophotometry (Nanodrop, ThermoFisher) and quality was examined with agarose gel electrophoresis. Gene expression was analyzed using Qiagen Pathway-Focused Mouse qPCR Arrays. We examined genes involved in osteogenesis, extracellular matrix, ubiquitination, and the p53, Pi3K, NFκB, and MAP Kinase, signaling pathways in bone tissue. Each array consisted of primer sets for 84 pathway-focused genes of interest, five reference genes (Gusb, Hprt1, Hsp90ab1, Gapdh, and Actb), one genomic DNA contamination control, three positive PCR controls and three positive reverse transcription controls on a 96 well plate. One μg of total RNA per sample (n = 6) was reverse transcribed to cDNA using RT2 First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (SABiosciences, Catalog #330401) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, genomic DNA elimination buffer was added to the sample and incubated at 42°C for 5 min. Reverse transcription cocktail containing primers, external controls and RT enzyme mix was then added to the samples and samples were incubated at 42°C for 15 min and the reaction was stopped by incubation at 95°C for 5 min. The cDNA was mixed with RT2 SYBR Green/Rox qPCR master mix and equal volumes (25 μl) were added to PCR plates. Plates were sealed with optical thin-walled 8-cap strips (Qiagen, Catalog #1065667) and qPCR of sample arrays was performed using an Applied Biosystems 7500 Real Time PCR instrument. Real-time PCR conditions were as follows: one cycle 95°C for 10 min, 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 1 min, followed by one cycle of 95°C for 15 s, 60°C for 1 min, 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 15 s. Gene expression levels from all arrays were analyzed for alterations in expression levels as compared to ground controls (n = 6, p<0.05) using a PCR Array Data Analysis Template (v3.2, SABiosciences). Data analysis was based on the ΔΔCt method and gene expression levels were normalized to four reference genes (Gusb, Hprt1, Gapdh, and Actb).

Immunohistochemical and Immunocytochemical Analysis
Sections of the right-proximal femur prepared as described above for TRAP Staining were also used for immunohistochemical and immunocytochemical analysis. The following primary polyclonal antibodies were used in the immunohistocehmical analysis: anti-p21 (1∶50 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-p53 (1∶50 dilution, Santa-Cruz Biotechnology), anti-Matrix Metallopeptidase 10 (1∶20 dilution, Novus Biologicals) and anti-Mdm2 (1∶25 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Peroxidase conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG was used as the secondary antibody (1∶5000 dilution, Jackson Immunoresearch). Briefly, sections were immersed in sodium citrate buffer for 10 min at 95°C, washed in DI water and immersed in PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.4 (2×5 min). Sections were then blocked in 10% normal blocking serum (Donkey serum in PBS-T) for a period of 1 h in a moist chamber at room temperature. Primary antibody incubation was conducted in a moist chamber at 4°C overnight. Sections were washed in PBS-T and incubated with peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody in a moist chamber at room temperature for 1 h and then rinsed with PBS-T and incubated in peroxidase substrate for 12–30 min until staining was complete. Sections were washed in DI water and dehydrated in 75%, 95% and 100% EtOH followed by 100% xylene for 3 min at each stage. Sections were mounted in mounting medium and visualized using an Olympus BX51 light microscope. For osteocyte nuclear localization, we used Hoechst 33342 staining (500 ng/ml in DI water for 10 min at room temperature, Invitrogen, Catalog #H1399) on deparaffinized sections of the right-proximal femur prepared as described above. Lacunae with and without Hoechst stained nuclei, and nuclear pyknotic morphology were used to quantify osteocyte apoptosis.